Datastream is the name of a type of broadband network connection in the United Kingdom. Datastream is a wholesale product in which the wholesale customer can purchase connectivity between their own point of presence and a number of end users. Some authors use the term "Datastream" for replacing the term Dataflow to avoid confusion with Dataflow Computing or Dataflow architecture, based on an indeterministic machine paradigm (a research scene which is dead meanwhile).

Technical details[edit]
The connections between the end users and the Other Logical Operator (OLO) (the wholesale customer of the DataStream product) were provided in three parts.

BT provided connectivity between the end user and the nearest BT Serving Exchange via asymmetric digital subscriber line, symmetric digital subscriber line, and fibre to the x. The end user access line could have a bandwidth ranging between 288 kbit/s and 8,128 kbit/s (8 Mibit/s) downstream and up to 832 kbit/s upstream for Asymmetric digital subscriber line, and up to 2048 kbit/s (2 Mibit/s) for Symmetric digital subscriber line. For fibre-based connections, speeds can be as high as 100 Mbit/s although most connections of this type are fibre from exchange to cabinet so therefore limited to a maximum of 40 Mbit/s.
For each serving exchange involved in providing end user access lines, a virtual path is provisioned to a BT ATM switch on BT's core network. A virtual path can range in size from 250 kbit/s to 34 Mbit/s. One or more Digital Subscriber Line Digital Multiplexers at the serving exchange combine the traffic from the end user access lines for delivery to the ATM switch.
From the BT switch, the traffic from the various virtual paths is combined and an ATM Customer Access Link (CAL) is used to connect to the Network Terminating Equipment (NTE) at the wholesale customer's point of presence.
Comparison to IPStream and LLU[edit]
IPStream, DataStream, and local loop unbundling (LLU) are all products that can be used for the delivery of bit-stream products, but represent different degrees of involvement from BT. In the case of LLU, the OLO has direct access to the twisted pair delivered to the end-user's NTE and has near total control of the connection from end-to-end. With DataStream, BT still manages the DSL multiplexing equipment at the various local exchanges, and hands off the aggregated traffic to the OLO at one or a few points of presence. With IPStream, BT also provides the IP transport services
In computer science, a stream is a sequence of data elements made available over time. A stream can be thought of as items on a conveyor belt being processed one at a time rather than in large batches.

Streams are processed differently from batch data – normal functions cannot operate on streams as a whole, as they have potentially unlimited data, and formally, streams are codata (potentially unlimited), not data (which is finite). Functions that operate on a stream, producing another stream, are known as filters, and can be connected in pipelines, analogously to function composition. Filters may operate on one item of a stream at a time, or may base an item of output on multiple items of input, such as a moving average.
The term "stream" is used in a number of similar ways:

"Stream editing", as with sed, awk, and perl. Stream editing processes a file or files, in-place, without having to load the file(s) into a user interface. One example of such use is to do a search and replace on all the files in a directory, from the command line.
On Unix and related systems based on the C language, a stream is a source or sink of data, usually individual bytes or characters. Streams are an abstraction used when reading or writing files, or communicating over network sockets. The standard streams are three streams made available to all programs.
I/O devices can be interpreted as streams, as they produce or consume potentially unlimited data over time.
In object-oriented programming, input streams are generally implemented as iterators.
In the Scheme language and some others, a stream is a lazily evaluated or delayed sequence of data elements. A stream can be used similarly to a list, but later elements are only calculated when needed. Streams can therefore represent infinite sequences and series.[1]
In the Smalltalk standard library and in other programming languages as well, a stream is an external iterator. As in Scheme, streams can represent finite or infinite sequences.
Stream processing — in parallel processing, especially in graphic processing, the term stream is applied to hardware as well as software. There it defines the quasi-continuous flow of data that is processed in a dataflow programming language as soon as the program state meets the starting condition of the stream.